README.md, before:

# atd-cost-of-service-reporting

Automated data processing for ATD's cost of service fee collection.

## Background

Austin Transportation provides various permitting services for fellow City departments. Effective Oct 1, 2021, ATD collects the same processsing feess from City departments its does non-City customers. We call this new fee collection procedure and supporting IT systems "Cost of Service Reporting."

## Business process - overview

1. A City department applies for an ATD-managed permit. For example, an excavation permit.
2. Automated processes in the AMANDA permitting system apply the appropriate fees to the application. By default, the fees are flagged in the AMANDA database as "paid". In fact, the fee has not been paid: funds will need to be completed via an interdepartmental transfer known as a journal voucher (JV).
3. On a monthly basis, a report is generated (with the help of this repo) which itemizes the fees assessed by each department. The report includes detail about the related permit, applicant, etc.
4. Each department is sent a list of the fees they have accrued. Departments review the fee list and confirm the assessment is accurate and provide funding numbers (FDUs) from which funds will be drawn to pay the fee balance.
5. Once approved, ATD Finance staff create journal vouchers which transfer funds from the partner department to ATD.


### Technical process

We use a Knack application, the "Right of Way Portal" as canonical repository for tracking these fees. This app allows business users to review, download, and distribute fee records for further review and processing by staff.

Cost of service fees records are extracted from the AMANDA database and loaded into Knack using `knack_load_fees.py`. The `where` clause used to extract these fees is quite simple:

```sql
    -- payment is not voided
    WHERE  accountpayment.voidflag = 'N'
    -- payment type is cost of service ('COS')
    AND accountpayment.paymenttype = 'COS'
    -- payment date is after sep 30, 2021 (the program started on 10/1/2021)
    AND accountpayment.paymentdate > To_date('09/30/2021', 'mm/dd/yyyy');
```

Each time the script runs, it queries all fees in AMANDA, compares the records to all fees in Knack, and inserts or updates records in the Knack app accordingly.

Records are uniquely identified the `accountbillfeersn` column, which identifies a single permit fee. A single permit often has multiple cost of service fees.

If a fee record exists in AMANDA that does not exist in Knack, the fee record is created in Knack. As well, formerly valid fees are occasionally voided in AMANDA, in which case they will be absent from the AMANDA database. If a fee record exists in Knack but is no longer in the AMANDA extract, the fee record is updated in Knack with a status of `deleted=true`. 

### Run the script in a Docker container

A docker container is available to simulate the production deployment. You can build the from the included Dockerfile, or pull the production image from Docker hub. Mount your local copy of the repo in order to overwrite the production code. You will need to prepare an `env_file` — the details of which can be found in the team password store.

```shell
docker run --env-file env_file --rm -it -v /path/to/your/repo/atd-cost-of-service-reporting:/app atddocker/atd-cost-of-service python knack_load_fees.py
```

Commit message:

update readme to include docker compose stack instructions

README.md, after:

# atd-cost-of-service-reporting

Automated data processing for ATD's cost of service fee collection.

## Background

Austin Transportation provides various permitting services for fellow City departments. Effective Oct 1, 2021, ATD collects the same processsing feess from City departments its does non-City customers. We call this new fee collection procedure and supporting IT systems "Cost of Service Reporting."

## Business process - overview

1. A City department applies for an ATD-managed permit. For example, an excavation permit.
2. Automated processes in the AMANDA permitting system apply the appropriate fees to the application. By default, the fees are flagged in the AMANDA database as "paid". In fact, the fee has not been paid: funds will need to be completed via an interdepartmental transfer known as a journal voucher (JV).
3. On a monthly basis, a report is generated (with the help of this repo) which itemizes the fees assessed by each department. The report includes detail about the related permit, applicant, etc.
4. Each department is sent a list of the fees they have accrued. Departments review the fee list and confirm the assessment is accurate and provide funding numbers (FDUs) from which funds will be drawn to pay the fee balance.
5. Once approved, ATD Finance staff create journal vouchers which transfer funds from the partner department to ATD.

### Technical process

We use a Knack application, the "Right of Way Portal" as canonical repository for tracking these fees. This app allows business users to review, download, and distribute fee records for further review and processing by staff.

Cost of service fees records are extracted from the AMANDA database and loaded into Knack using `knack_load_fees.py`. The `where` clause used to extract these fees is quite simple:

```sql
    -- payment is not voided
    WHERE  accountpayment.voidflag = 'N'
    -- payment type is cost of service ('COS')
    AND accountpayment.paymenttype = 'COS'
    -- payment date is after sep 30, 2021 (the program started on 10/1/2021)
    AND accountpayment.paymentdate > To_date('09/30/2021', 'mm/dd/yyyy');
```

Each time the script runs, it queries all fees in AMANDA, compares the records to all fees in Knack, and inserts or updates records in the Knack app accordingly.

Records are uniquely identified the `accountbillfeersn` column, which identifies a single permit fee. A single permit often has multiple cost of service fees.

If a fee record exists in AMANDA that does not exist in Knack, the fee record is created in Knack. As well, formerly valid fees are occasionally voided in AMANDA, in which case they will be absent from the AMANDA database. If a fee record exists in Knack but is no longer in the AMANDA extract, the fee record is updated in Knack with a status of `deleted=true`.

### Development environment

A `docker compose` stack is in place to aid in the development of the software in this repository.

#### Usage

First, copy the `env_template` file to `env` and fill in the necessary environment variables.

Then, to enter into a `bash` shell inside a container that simulates the environment that the script will be run in when invoked by airflow.

```sql
docker compose run reporting
```

And then to run the program inside that shell:

```sql
./knack_load_fees.py
```
